---
tags:
  - subchapter
---
# 1. What Is Idealization, and Why Do We Care?

For the purposes at hand, we do not need to identify all the necessary and sufficient conditions for seeing any vague claim as an idealization. Instead, we can simply focus on a single crucial feature: they _falsely_ represent one or more aspects of the real world in order to ease calculation or reasoning ==(are these all the things people do with models? reasoning is pretty broad so should be safe)==. This mirrors the main issue with boundary drawing: we assume we can demarcate the boundary between bald and non-bald people in order to facilitate reasoning about bald people (deciding when to point and laugh), but identifying or justifying the exact baldness-threshold is difficult or perhaps impossible. In both cases we appear use a useful fiction in order to get the job done.[^1]

However, while one of key features of idealizations is that they intentionally distort some aspect of the target system, we should not assume that the boundary drawing problem necessarily introduces false descriptions, as doing so would beg the question. Instead, we will take the by-now familiar stance of examining _how, if at all_ the use of idealizations could be justified, specifically in physics, and hopefully extrapolate from there.

## Characterizations of idealization

Characterizations of idealizations are abound in the literature, although few dare claim to provide an exhaustive one. @Norton2012 's characterization of idealization as opposed to approximation is well received:

- Approximation: proposition which sort of describes the target
- Idealization: model whose properties sort of describe the target

Norton's standard example is a ball falling through the atmosphere. We have an excellent formula for calculating the velocity $v(t)$ starting at $v=t=0$ as$v(t)=\frac{g}{k}(1-\exp(-kt))=gt-\frac{gkt^2}{2}+\frac{gk^2t^3}{6}-\ldots$
where $g$ is the acceleration due to gravity, and $k$ a friction coefficient.

As any physics student knows, it is often convenient to leave out the influence of air resistance. Setting $k=0$ yields $v(t)=gt$.

Given Norton's distinction, we can view the above formula in two ways: either as an approximation or as an idealization. If we view it as an approximation, i.e. a proposition describing the actual system (a ball falling through the Earth's atmosphere) inexactly, we can say that this is a good approximation for the initial part of the ball's descent, becoming a worse and worse approximation as the ball continues to fall. We could also view it as an idealization, in which case we view the above equation as representing a (false) model of a ball falling in a vacuum. It is not the description of this model that is false, rather the model (idealization) misrepresents our world in some way, namely by leaving out air.

In this example, the difference between an approximation and an idealization is simply a matter of perspective: we can freely shift between viewing the formula as an approximation or idealization. This "shifting" Norton calls promotion and demotion respectively. Promotion consists in taking the approximation and taking it as the basis for describing a new, idealized model. In this case, removing the effect of air resistance is promoted to an idealized situation of an Earth without any atmosphere.  Demotion on the other hand consists in extracting one or more inexact propositions from an existing idealization and applying them to the actual system, e.g. seeing that in No-Air-Earth the speed of the ball is $v(t)=gt$ and applying it to the ball falling in our actual Earth. ==I mention this now because it will come in handy later==.

[@Strevens2007] puts forth another classification of idealizations, which characterizes idealizations more similarly to how I did above, as deliberate falsifications of reality. Specifically, Strevens conceptualizes idealizations in terms of the operation driving them: setting a parameter to zero, infinity, or some other number.


{/** TODO:  Write up a proper analysis of Streven's classification of idealizations.
    * 
    * labels: write, big, II
    * milestones: 
    */}
 


{/* ### Why do we not consider the target system an idealization? It's also a model */}



{/* ### Is idealization different than abstraction?*/}


## Narrowing

As is tradition by now, I wish to focus on a subsection of idealizations first in order to get a better grasp on them. Idealization as construed above does not differ that much from a model, indeed Norton even seems to treat them as synonyms. Analyzing models on their own is difficult, and since idealizations are difficult to distinguish from models entirely, analyzing idealizations on their own will in all likelihood also turn out to be difficult. Therefore let us turn to a more problematic example of idealization, one which has more easily identifiable examples: infinite idealizations.

Infinite idealizations (also called "asymptotic idealizations" by for instance [@Strevens2019] or "asymptotic explanation" by for instance [@Batterman2005]) are, put crudely, an idealization which is arrived at through some sort of limiting operation, through which a parameter of the original model is made to approach infinity[^infinitesimal]. Commonly discussed examples in the literature are the thermodynamic limit (TDL), the fractional quantum Hall effect (FQHE), the Aharanov-Bohm effect, infinite population models ….

As promised, infinite idealizations run into more obvious problems more quickly: in the thermodynamic limit the number of particles goes to infinity, the FQHE posits 2D particles, the AB effect requires an infinitely long solenoid and in order to explain gene distributions biologists assume infinite populations. _Prima facie_, the issue appears straightforward: such infinite systems simply do not exist. “Can you show me an infinitely long solenoid?”, the detractor exclaims. However, why does this appear so problematic? After all, was intentional misrepresentation not the characterizing feature of idealizations? Why is setting air resistance to $0$ less problematic than setting the $z$-axis to $0$?

…



# Footnotes
[^well-behaved]: Again, Norton actually does not consider ill-behaved idealizations to be idealizations at all, but for now we shall simply pretend he does in order to compare his stance.

{/** TODO: Find out what the name of the position that thinks that boundaries are vague but the line is real are called 
    * I should probably also write more about vagueness if I want it to be a significant portion of my thesis at all. 
    * labels: II, vagueness
    * milestones: 
    */} 

[^1]: The analogy is not perfectly sound of course: while most agree that idealizations are in fact fictional, the (non-)existence of general boundaries are much more contentious. The position which claims that such boundary *does* in fact exist is called ==XXXXXXXXXXXXXXX==