---
tags:
  - subchapter
---

# 3. Geometric phase?

The explanation of the previous section has left us with a bittersweet feeling.
We made some good arguments for the existence of an entirely new class of
(pseudo-)particles! Think of all the new physics we could do: quantum computers,.... that's about it, but nonetheless very exciting! However, it came at a rather severe cost: us accepting a problematic idealization, blech! Is there then no other option? No one to save us? Are we doomed to accept platonism? No, luckily we need not stoop so low.

Even if we accept the 2D idealization, the previous section still left us a little unsatisfied. It provided us with an explanation of the _possibility_ of anyons, but crucially not with the tools to know _what_ phase we should expect from any potential anyon. According to ref:eq:anyonphase, anyons take on an exchange-phase that's a multiple of the number exchanges and which depends on the direction the exchange took place, but not much else. It could be any multiple of the winding-number, which does not provide us with much predictive power if we ever want to perform an experiment looking for these buggers. "But",
I hear you say, "did @Bartolomei2020 not definitively show that anyons exist?" We'll get there when we get there, _Jeremy_, but we can ask some annoying questions to get us started.

Would they simply perform some experiment, somehow measure the phase and see that it is different: would this be convincing enough evidence? No, of course not, we would want to predict the phase beforehand and see how well we measure up to Mother Nature. Furthermore, how did they know where to look? Presumably something 2D-y, but that can be a lot of things: graphene is not very interesting on its own.

{/** TODO: Improve description of why the dynamical phase is not the cause of measuring a different phase after a certain period of time
    * 
    * labels: expansion
    * milestones: 
    */} 


Before spoiling the surprise about what the experimental setup is, let us step back once again and wonder for a bit: how could the phase change if not for this abstract topological gegrabbel? To make an educated guess, recall the end of the last section, where we learned that the wavefunction plus phase _projects down_ to$|\Psi|^2$, which is the physically relevant quantity. So we have a vector in Hilbert space, $\ket{\Psi}$, which varies in some way which does not effect its length $|\Psi|^2$. Of course, one of the "things" varying is the phase, but the phase does not simply change randomly on its own with everything else staying the same, that would violate Schrodinger's equation.


Everything in the Hamiltonian can act as a parameter we can vary which could potentially impact the phase, the most obvious being the time $t$. It turns out that $t$ does indeed lead to a phase, the so called dynamical phase $e^{iEt}$. However, this unlikely to be the phase we are looking for, as it varies rather quickly and all systems are subject to this phase, no matter if they are exchanged.


What then? The most straightforward seems to be the position, as that is explicitly what is varied during exchange. However, it is not immediately obvious why this would lead to a change in phase in a way that is different from the topological explanation given before, which is not an improvement: no calculation. Have I led you to a dead end? Was it all a ruse?

{/** TODO:  Rewrite absolutely horrendous intro for holonomy
    * "phase-picnic" lmao
    * labels: rewrite
    */} 


Fortunately for us I have brought an excellent analogy to this phase-picnic. The answer has to do something with geometry of course, as was spoiled in the introduction to this chapter, and we are so blessed that there is even a complete mathematical field examining moving things over geometry: differential geometry, same thing being used to do gravity and such.

A good analogy to the phase of a vector in Hilbert space would also have something like a vector varying which would affect something else than its length and position (as that is what we possibly would like to vary, and that would hardly be surprising). Again, lucky bastards we are, there exists an_extremely_ straightforward analogy. A situation in which a vector is moved, its length is unnaffected, but then suddenly after moving it in a circle something is changed: the angle of a vector in regular ol' $\mathbb{R}^n$. A vector in a real vector space does not have much to vary in addition to its position and length,
the only thing left is its angle!

When we transport a vector along some curved surface its angle changes. Hardly surprising, as there are a lot of ways to transfer something, but slightly surprising if we only think of transporting as transposition:

{/** TODO: Better visualization for "basic" vector transposition instead of this janky pre thing 
    * 
    * labels: visualization
    */} 
```
       ^                    ^
      /                    /
     /         --\>        /
    /                    /

```

This does not change the angle one bit! How then? Well, we said _along_ a _surface_, just moving it in $\mathbb{R}^n$ is cheating a bit eh. Moving along a surface is done with _parallel transport_, which means, as you smart cookies guessed, means keeping it parallel to the surface of said... surface. When we do this something surprising does happen: when we complete a loop on a surface with some _curves_, such as the sphere, that is not a circle or a straight line we end up at a different angle than we started! WHAT!

## How does geometrical phase get there
{/** TODO: Create Obsidian plugin which finds autolinks citations
     labels: backlog devx
    */} 

As Berry said in his original paper, the occurence of the geometrical phase does indeed appear quite "magical" [@Berry1984]. However, as @Simon1983
soon thereafter elucidated, the mystery largely disappears we link it to a more general geometric property: [[Holonomy|Holonomy.]]

Holonomy is the phenomenon of a vector (or more generally any mathematical object) not remaining completely invariant after being [[Parallel transport]]ed along some curved surface. An example is in order.

### North pole example

Say you are at the North-pole, looking "south" (every direction is south) along the Greenwhich meridian line. Your field of vision (let's just take the center of it for simplicity) is our vector which we will be parallel transporting. It has a length of approximately 5km (this does not really matter) and is facing wherever you are looking, originating wherever you are standing. We will now only change one of these variables gradually, your position. You start to bravely swim along this meridian, eventually reaching the equator. Since you are already making a fool's journey, you figure you might as well lean into it and add an extra condition: you will never turn during your journey. Meaning that once you reach the equator, instead of turning 90 degrees to face East, you shuffle Eastword across Africa like some sort of stray crab. Once you reach the international date line in the Pacific ocean, you do not stop acting the fool and begin imitating the jellyfish you meet there, swimming backwards on your back in a straight line back to your starting point.

Once you have been certain you returned back to the same spot again, the question now is: which direction are you facing? Given that you never turned around, you might have expected to face England once again. However, to your utter dismay you are still staring down that boring international date line,
ocean as far you could see. Despite never turning around, you have ended up turning $180^\circ$ nonetheless! Curse you, geometry!

This extra angle picked up on your Odyssey is called a **[[Holonomy|holonomy]]**, which is a fancy word for the failure of parallel transport along a certain manifold, in this case the 2-Sphere (in normal people talk: the surface of a sphere). While this may be shocking to our foolhardy protagonist, there is something deeply intuitive about not ending up facing the same direction here. But being intuitive does not mean easy to explain: all we know for now that this has something to do with the curvature of the space we are traversing, but not exactly which value it obtains .[^4]

> [!comment] 
> These two questions and answers are rather handy, and they cite the following two papers as useful
> https://physics.stackexchange.com/questions/383281/when-is-the-berry-phase-only-dependent-on-path-topology
>
> https://physics.stackexchange.com/questions/235503/why-is-the-phase-picked-up-during-identical-particle-exchange-a-topological-inva?rq=1
>
[@Leinaas1977]
[@Knapp2016]


Turns out this also works in QM! The berry phase does this for us. So great,
let's just calculate the Berry phase right? Well, sure, but we cannot just calculate the Berry phase without a Hamiltonian, wavefunction, all that good quantum stuff, for that we need some context.

Turns out we have one very promising candidate: the fractional quantum hall effect. To not waste time, let's calculate it:

$$e^{i\theta}=\exp{-i\oint_C \mathcal{A}_i(\lambda) d\lambda^i}$$

where $C$ is the path traversed by the particle through some parameter space, $\lambda^i$ the parameter being varied and $\mathcal{A}_i$ the _[[Berry Connection]]_ for a specific quantum state $\ket{n(R)}$, defined as

$$\mathcal{A}=i\bra{n(R)}\nabla_R\ket{n(R)}$$

{/** TODO:  clean up lambdas and Rs
     labels: 
    */} 


We have finally reached the point at which we have no choice but to look at an actual physical system, as we need to have an actual wavefunction to measure things by. The system that has historically been ascribed anyons is called the Fractional Quantum Hall Effect, which is also the subject of the recent experimental results by @Bartolomei2020. Evaluating the merits of the geometrical approach to anyonic phase, then, necessitates a clearer understanding of the FQHE.



# Footnotes


