---
citekey: Norton2012
type: journalArticle
title: "Approximation and idealization: Why the difference matters"
author: John D. Norton
journal: Philosophy of Science
volume: 79
issue: 2
pages: 207-232
year: 2012 
DOI: 10.1086/664746
ISSN: 00318248
keywords: approximation, explanation, idealization, thermodynamic_limit, thermodynamics
---

# Norton (2012) - Approximation and idealization Why the difference matters

> [!abstract]
> It is proposed that we use the term "approximation" for inexact description of a target system and "idealization" for another system whose properties also provide an inexact description of the target system. Since systems generated by a limiting process can often have quite unexpected-even inconsistent-properties, familiar limit processes used in statistical physics can fail to provide idealizations but merely provide approximations. © 2012 by the Philosophy of Science Association.

## Files and Links
- **Uri**: http://zotero.org/users/6193144/items/UQPVDZYQ
- **File**: [Norton_2012_Approximation_and_idealization.pdf](file:///Users/thomas/OneDrive/Papers/Academic/Norton_2012_Approximation_and_idealization.pdf); [NortonJ_2012_Approximation_and_idealization.pdf](file:///Users/thomas/OneDrive/Papers/Academic/NortonJ_2012_Approximation_and_idealization.pdf)
- **Local Library**: [Zotero](zotero://select/library/items/UQPVDZYQ)

## Tags and Collections
- **Keywords**: approximation, explanation, idealization, thermodynamic_limit, thermodynamics
- **Collections**: Academic, Academic, Read

---
## Summary

It is tempting to say that idealizations are just "approximately true". Approximate truth is however a rather aspecific term, and it would be good to get a better grip on it. In order to better understand the trouble behind most idealizations we will use @Norton2012'd proposed distinction between approximations and idealizations. 

While both approximations and idealizations in some respect deal with falsehoods, they do so in slightly distinct ways. Norton on the one hand characterizes approximations as propositional: they are claims about some system which are untrue in that they "merely describe \[the\] target system inexactly" [@Norton2012 p. 207]. On the other hand, idealizations compose a much more ambitious class of falsehoods: they are new, fictitious systems, of which some properties approximate those of the target system.

> [!example]
>  ### Ignoring higher order air resistance
>  If we "know" that air resistance is ..., but we use ... because it's easier, then the claim
>  > The air resistance felt by a ball doing X, Y is Z
>  > 
>  is an approximation because it's a statement that is inexact.
>  
> If on the other hand we imagine a frictionless scenario where there is no air, then we are in idealization land: we have created a fake scenario which we use to generate approximations.

This leads to the second important concept Norton proposes: promotions and demotions.

### Promotions & Demotions

As seen above, the difference between approximations and idealizations seems to be more one of framing and methods, rather than fundamentally different modes of thinking. We can shift from idealizations to approximations by getting rid of the idealizing construct and just leaving the claim, here "the velocity of the ball will be X". Similarly, we can immediately be in idealization-land by simply imagining a new system with these properties.

The former @Norton2012 calls "demotion" and the latter "promotion".

This all seems incredibly boring, but here we arrive at the crux of the discussion: when approximations *cannot* be promoted to idealizations.

### Different types of promotion
1. Promotion succeeds: approximation becomes idealization and idealization makes sense.
2. Promotion fails because the idealized system does not exist.
3. Promotion fails because the idealization has properties which do not approximate the target.

### Case studies

Norton then spends some more time studying some specific cases 


----

## Comments

[[Can an approximation be qualitative?]]


----

## Extracted Annotations

Annotations(4/14/2022, 12:15:52 PM)

> *“I will propose a use of the terms that roughly reflects common usage: approximations merely describe a target system inexactly. They are propositional. Idealizations refer to new systems, some of whose properties approximate some of those of the target system.”* [(Norton, 2012, p. 207)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6X2R2Q4J?page=1) 

This is basically the central claim.


> *“these “limit properties,” as I shall call them, provide approximations”* [(Norton, 2012, p. 208)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6X2R2Q4J?page=2)

> *“We may also posit an infinity of components and examine the resulting system’s properties. These “limit systems” are idealizations.”* [(Norton, 2012, p. 208)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6X2R2Q4J?page=2)


# 2. Approximation and Idealization Distinguished.[ ](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6X2R2Q4J?page=2)

> *“An approximation is an inexact description of a target system. It is propositional. An idealization is a real or fictitious system, distinct from the target system, some of whose properties provide an inexact description of some aspects of the target system.”* [(Norton, 2012, p. 209)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6X2R2Q4J?page=3) 

While Norton presents this as a somewhat clear distinction, I don't think it works very well as a way to determine which things are idealizations or approximations.



## 2.3. Promotion and Demotion.[ ](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6X2R2Q4J?page=5)

> *“Approximations and idealizations are interrelated in a way illustrated by these last two examples: An idealization can be demoted to an approximation by discarding the idealizing system and merely extracting the inexact description; however, the inverse promotion to an idealizing system will not always succeed. In the inverse promotion, we consider the target system to be one of a sequence of systems whose limit system is intended to be the idealizing system. The promotion fails if the sequence fails to have a limit system or has a limit system with unsuitable properties.”* [(Norton, 2012, p. 211)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6X2R2Q4J?page=5)


# 3. The Problem of Limits.[ ](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6X2R2Q4J?page=6)


## 3.1. Limit Property and Limit System Agree.[ ](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6X2R2Q4J?page=6)

> *“The example implements the general scheme in which we have the sequences: System1, System2, System3, . . . , Limit System agrees with Property1, Property2, Property3, . . . , Limit Property.”* [(Norton, 2012, p. 212)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6X2R2Q4J?page=6)


## 3.2. There Is No Limit System.[ ](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6X2R2Q4J?page=7)

> *“This example implements the scheme System1, System2, System3, . . . (No Limit) Property1, Property2, Property3, . . . Limit Property.”* [(Norton, 2012, p. 213)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6X2R2Q4J?page=7)


## 3.3. Limit Property and Limit System Disagree.[ ](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6X2R2Q4J?page=7)

> *“The example implements the general scheme in which we have the sequences: System1, System2, System3, . . . Limit System disagrees with Property1, Property2, Property3, . . . Limit Property,”* [(Norton, 2012, p. 214)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6X2R2Q4J?page=8)


# 4. The Limits of Statistical Mechanics.[ ](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6X2R2Q4J?page=8)

> *“Much of the thermodynamic formalism is concerned with the study of states of infinite systems.” What makes the transition to an infinity of components admissible is the assumption that the infinite systems will provide a good description of large but finite systems.”* [(Norton, 2012, p. 215)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6X2R2Q4J?page=9) 

i.e. that they are approxmations


- [ ] check out survey on supertasks
 - *“for a survey, see Laraudogoitia (2011).”* [(Norton, 2012, p. 215)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6X2R2Q4J?page=9)

> *“All the finite systems have the properties of determinism and energy conservation; hence, the limit properties are determinism and conservation. The infinite limit system, however, is indeterministic and nonconservative.”* [(Norton, 2012, p. 216)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6X2R2Q4J?page=10) 

How do you pick which properties to focus on to be pathological?



## 4.2.1. The Continuum Limit.[ ](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6X2R2Q4J?page=11)

> *“In the continuum limit described by Compagner (1989), the number of components n goes to infinity in such a way that the extensive magnitudes of the system, such as volume and energy, remain constant. If d is a parameter that measures the size of the individual components, this condition entails that nd 3 remains a nonzero constant, for nd 3 is proportional to the volume of the system occupied by matter. Similarly, Boltzmann’s constant k goes to zero since nk remains a nonzero constant. For the mean energy of a mole of a monatomic gas, n p N,is given by , and this remains constant in the limit”* [(Norton, 2012, p. 217)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6X2R2Q4J?page=11) 

Similar to half-tone printing: a lot of points will either have black, white, or no determinate state as a limit state when subdividing an array of squares with every step.In other words,smaller and smaller things -&gt; infinite amounts of small things, not to a continuum



## 4.3. Renormalization Group Methods Are Approximations Not Idealizations.[ ](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6X2R2Q4J?page=13)

> *“Some authors, such as Lanford and Ruelle, invoke the strong form”* [(Norton, 2012, p. 219)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6X2R2Q4J?page=13) ... *“of the thermodynamic limit and investigate the properties of infinite systems. Others use what I shall call a “weak” form of the thermodynamic limit that mentions only the existence of limit properties.”* [(Norton, 2012, p. 220)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6X2R2Q4J?page=14)

> *“Kadanoff (2000, 239) reviews the governing fact that a partition function of a system of finitely many components is analytic. It becomes nonanalytic only in the limit of infinitely many components, whereupon the thermodynamic quantities derived from it can harbor discontinuities that characterize critical points. He continues: “We reach the important conclusion: The existence of a phase transition requires an infinite system. No phase transitions occur in systems with a finite number of degrees of freedom.”* [(Norton, 2012, p. 220)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6X2R2Q4J?page=14)

> *“Insofar as they yield results, we shall see the limit taken by renormalization group methods is of the properties only, such as in the weak thermodynamic limit of Le Bellac et al.”* [(Norton, 2012, p. 220)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6X2R2Q4J?page=14) 

Interesting claim.



# 5. Phase Transitions and Finite Systems.[ ](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6X2R2Q4J?page=17)

> *“My concern here is one argument used to support the antireduction view. It asserts, contrary to the analysis of the last section, that renormalization group methods do employ infinite idealizations, that these infinite idealizations somehow outstrip the reductive powers of statistical mechanics and, moreover, that they are ineliminable.”* [(Norton, 2012, p. 223)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6X2R2Q4J?page=17) 

@Norton2012 disagrees with @Butterfield2020 on whether renormalization group methods are infinite idealiations.


> *“For an entry into this literature, see Liu (1999), Callender (2001), Batterman (2002, 2005, 2010, 2011), Belot (2005), Jones (2006), Butterfield (2011a, 2011b), Butterfield and Bouatta (2011), and Menon and Callender (2011).”* [(Norton, 2012, p. 223)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6X2R2Q4J?page=17) 

Minor literature overview for reduction/emergence statistical mechanics.


> *“Through an analogous infinite limit, we can recover nonanalytic functions from the functions governing arbitrarily large systems of finitely many components. These nonanalytic functions and their discontinuities have a pragmatic value only. If the atomic theory of matter is true, then ordinary thermal systems of finitely many components cannot display discontinuous changes in their thermodynamic properties. The changes they manifest are merely so rapid as to be observationally indistinguishable from discontinuous behavior.13 
> Indeed, if we could establish that the phase transitions of real substances exhibit these discontinuities, we would have refuted the atomic theory of matter, which holds that ordinary thermal systems are composed of finitely many atoms, molecules, or components. It must be feared that a similar refutation is at hand, if the positing of infinitely many components is necessary to recover other observed behaviors of phase transitions.”* [(Norton, 2012, p. 225)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6X2R2Q4J?page=19) 

Basically @Callendar2001: discontinuities in the phase transition functions are at odds with the atomic theory of matter. Although: we do not believe in the atomic theory of matter to begin with, I think that most physicists when pressed would agree that QFT is a more precise representation of our world.

> *“In the case of phase transitions, at best, we do not know whether the limit system and limit properties agree. For, in general, we do not know whether the systems to which the infinite component Hamiltonians are attached carry the limit properties of those with finite component Hamiltonians. Investigating this agreement is not a standard part of a renormalization group analysis. We have some reason to expect the agreement to fail. In a few cases that have been worked out, such as those mentioned in section 4.1, it does fail. Extra conditions, peculiar to the infinite case, are needed to enforce specifically identified finite behaviors such as determinism. With this uncertainty, prudence indicates that we should dispense with the idealization, for the approximation already tells us what we could learn from the idealization about the target system. Persisting with the idealization merely risks the error of attributing properties to the limit system that it does not bear. In short, the renormalization group analysis of phase transitions is a case in which all benefits are already accrued by the approximation. Promoting it to an idealization merely risks erroneous attributions for no gain.”* [(Norton, 2012, p. 226)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6X2R2Q4J?page=20) 

Basically: "if we can make due with the approximations then don't idealize them dummy."I know that this is not a popular view wrt renormalization group.


> *“The physics of phase transitions is complicated and difficult, and its philosophical analysis is rewarding. However, once one sees past the traps of the infinite limits, it is hard to find philosophical discontinuities.”* [(Norton, 2012, p. 227)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6X2R2Q4J?page=21) 

Mwah, not really sure I agree here. Why though?


> *“Finally, the idea that discontinuous changes of phase transitions are emergent phenomena is difficult to penetrate, for the phenomena at issue are not possible objects of experience. Real phase transitions cannot exhibit the discontinuities on pain of contradicting the atomic theory of matter, and, were the discontinuities established factually, the atomic theory would fall.”* [(Norton, 2012, p. 228)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6X2R2Q4J?page=22) 

This is precisely what @Shech2019 argues against, because you cannot say it contradicts unless you have some argument that they are claimed to be real.


